= the ten commandments =

01. testability
   * write code that is easy to test.
   * use test data
   * measure code coverage (e.g. EMMA eclipse plugin)
   * minimize the amount of code that is not testable.
   * measure performance in tests to evaluate design decisions.

02. responsive user interface
   * optimize for power users
     * recently used items
     * short cuts
     * autocompletion
     * system-wide search
     * user dependent (list) views
     * saved searches 
     * automate whenever possible (e.g. create contract from offering / convert "a" to "b" / inform employee / create report / ...)
     * visualize and support workflows 
   * what should be the response times?
   * write tests to measure performance easily.

03. be prepared for db migration issues
   * how can you migrate existing client installations when you changed the db schema? -> document this!
 
04. reuse mature existing components whenever possible

05. open project quickly to the community
   * tell others about the project / discuss about it
   * do prototypes

06. create prototypes.
   * publish new stable release every n weeks with little improvements.
   * use branches for experiments.

07. localise from the beginning and document how to localisation works.
   * prepare for different languages / currencies / date formattings / character sets

08. do not tie to one specific implementation
   * do not depend on one specific db / framework (e.g. ui framework)

09. automate whenever possible
   * automate tests / generation of documentation / deployment

10. provide interfaces to the outside world
   * other systems should be able to interact with the crm (e.g. webservices, POST/GET over JSON)